CNV-20256: VM memory dump (#54036)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/virt-virtctl-commands.adoc

* `--vm`: Exports the PVCs of a VM.
* `--snapshot`: Exports the PVCs contained in a `VirtualMachineSnapshot` CR.
* `--pvc`: Exports a PVC.
* Optional: `--ttl=1h` specifies the time to live. The default duration is 2 hours.

|`virtctl vmexport delete <vmexport_name>`
|Delete a `VirtualMachineExport` CR manually.

|`virtctl vmexport download <vmexport_name> --output=<output_file> --volume=<volume_name>`
|Download the volume defined in a `VirtualMachineExport` CR.

* `--output` specifies the file format. Example: `disk.img.gz`.
* `--volume` specifies the volume to download. This flag is optional if only one volume is available.

Optional:

* `--keep-vme` retains the `VirtualMachineExport` CR after download. The default behavior is to delete the `VirtualMachineExport` CR after download.
* `--insecure` enables an insecure HTTP connection.

|`virtctl vmexport download <vmexport_name> --<vm\|snapshot\|pvc>=<object_name> --output=<output_file> --volume=<volume_name>`
|Create a `VirtualMachineExport` CR and then download the volume defined in the CR.
|===

[id='vm-memory-dump_{context}']

> == VM memory dump

Reviewer: This section seems to be a mix of a procedure and reference material. I think it would be best to take lines 135 to 164 and refactor them into a proper procedure and pull the table (lines 166 to 191) into a separate reference module. I think that following the spirit of the mod docs rules, the reference content above should also be modularized. That issue is less urgent, since the content above is all reference material.

You can use the `virtctl memory-dump` command to output a virtual machine (VM) memory dump on a PVC. You can specify an existing PVC or use the `--create-claim` flag to create a new PVC.

.Prerequisites

* The PVC volume mode must be `FileSystem`.
* The PVC must be large enough to contain the memory dump.
+
The formula for calculating the PVC size is `(VMMemorySize + 100Mi) * FileSystemOverhead`, where `100Mi` is the memory dump overhead.

* You must enable the hot plug feature gate in the `HyperConverged` custom resource by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch hco kubevirt-hyperconverged -n openshift-cnv \
  --type json -p '[{"op": "add", "path": "/spec/featureGates", \
  "value": "HotplugVolumes"}]'
----

> .Downloading the memory dump
> 
> Download the memory dump by using the `virtctl vmexport download` command:
> 
> [source,terminal]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure
+
* Download the memory dump by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
```

----
$ virtctl vmexport download <vmexport_name> --vm\|pvc=<object_name> \
  --volume=<volume_name> --output=<output_file>
----

> .`virtctl memory-dump` commands

Reviewer: If you modularize this content, this would need to be a new reference module and be refactored as a heading.

[width="100%",cols="1a,2a",options="header"]
|===
|Command |Description
|`virtctl memory-dump get <vm_name> --claim-name=<pvc_name>`
|Save the memory dump of a VM on a PVC. The memory dump status is displayed in the `status` section of the `VirtualMachine` resource.

Optional:

* `--create-claim` creates a new PVC with the appropriate size. This flag has the following options:

** `--storage-class=<storage_class>`: Specify a storage class for the PVC.
** `--access-mode=<access_mode>`: Specify `ReadWriteOnce` or `ReadWriteMany`.

|`virtctl memory-dump get <vm_name>`
|Rerun the `virtctl memory-dump` command with the same PVC.

This command overwrites the previous memory dump.

|`virtctl memory-dump remove <vm_name>`
|Remove a memory dump.

You must remove a memory dump manually if you want to change the target PVC.

This command removes the association between the VM and the PVC, so that the memory dump is not displayed in the `status` section of the `VirtualMachine` resource. The PVC is not affected.
|===

[id='uploading-images_{context}']

> == Uploading images

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Image upload commands
```

You can use the `virtctl image-upload` commands to upload a VM image to a data volume.

.`virtctl image-upload` commands
[width="100%",cols="1a,2a",options="header"]
|===
|Command |Description
|`virtctl image-upload dv <datavolume_name> --image-path=</path/to/image> --no-create`
|Upload a VM image to a data volume that already exists.

|`virtctl image-upload dv <datavolume_name> --size=<datavolume_size> --image-path=</path/to/image>`
|Upload a VM image to a new data volume of a specified requested size.
|===

[id='viewing-information-about-the-environment_{context}']

> == Viewing information about the environment

Reviewer: Maybe, _Environment information commands_.

|===
|Command |Description
|`virtctl vmexport create <vmexport_name> --vm\|snapshot\|pvc=<object_name>`
|Create a `VirtualMachineExport` custom resource (CR) to export a volume from a VM, VM snapshot, or PVC.

* `--vm`: Exports the PVCs of a VM.
* `--snapshot`: Exports the PVCs contained in a `VirtualMachineSnapshot` CR.
* `--pvc`: Exports a PVC.
* Optional: `--ttl=1h` specifies the time to live. The default duration is 2 hours.

|`virtctl vmexport delete <vmexport_name>`
|Delete a `VirtualMachineExport` CR manually.

|`virtctl vmexport download <vmexport_name> --output=<output_file> --volume=<volume_name>`
|Download the volumes defined in a `VirtualMachineExport` CR.

* `--output` specifies the file format. Example: `disk.img.gz`.
* `--volume` specifies the volume to download. This flag is optional if only one volume is available.

Optional:

* `--keep-vme` retains the `VirtualMachineExport` CR after download. The default behavior is to delete the `VirtualMachineExport` CR after download.
* `--insecure` enables an insecure HTTP connection.

|`virtctl vmexport download <vmexport_name> --<vm\|snapshot\|pvc>=<object_name> --output=<output_file>`

> |Create a `VirtualMachineExport` CR and then download the volumes defined in the CR.

Reviewer 2: so related to what I commented on the memory dump download I think 'download the volumes defined in the CR' is not accurate since you can only download 1 volume at a time, if there is more then 1 volume you have to add the --volume flag and mention which volume you want to download

Author: OK. I wasn't sure whether the user could download multiple volumes or only one volume at a time. I will clarify.

* The PVC must be large enough to contain the memory dump.
+
The formula for calculating the PVC size is `(VMMemorySize + 100Mi) * FileSystemOverhead`, where `100Mi` is the memory dump overhead.

* You must enable the hot plug feature gate in the `HyperConverged` custom resource by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch hco kubevirt-hyperconverged -n openshift-cnv \
  --type json -p '[{"op": "add", "path": "/spec/featureGates", \
  "value": "HotplugVolumes"}]'
----

.Downloading the memory dump

Download the memory dump by using the `virtctl vmexport download` command:

[source,terminal]
----
$ virtctl vmexport download <vmexport_name> \
  --vm\|pvc=<object_name> --output=<output_file>
----

.`virtctl memory-dump` commands
[width="100%",cols="1a,2a",options="header"]
|===
|Command |Description
|`virtctl memory-dump get <vm_name> --claim-name=<pvc_name>`
|Save the memory dump of a VM on a PVC. The memory dump status is displayed in the `status` section of the `VirtualMachine` resource.

Optional:

* `--create-claim` creates a new PVC with the appropriate size. This flag has the following options:

** `--storage-class=<storage_class>`

> ** `--access-mode=ReadWriteOnce`

Reviewer 2: currently can be either Readwriteonce or ReadWriteMany (just not readonly)

Author: Understood. Will fix.

the specified port of the node.

|`virtctl vnc --kubeconfig=$KUBECONFIG <vmi_name>`
|Open a VNC (Virtual Network Client) connection to a VMI.

Accessing the graphical console of a VMI through VNC requires a remote viewer on your local machine.

|`virtctl vnc --kubeconfig=$KUBECONFIG --proxy-only=true <vmi_name>`
|Display the port number and connect manually to a VMI by using any viewer through the VNC connection.

|`virtctl vnc --kubeconfig=$KUBECONFIG --port=<port-number> <vmi_name>`
|Specify a port number to run the proxy on the specified port, if that port is available.

If a port number is not specified, the proxy runs on a random port.
|===

[id='exporting-vms_{context}']
== Exporting VM volumes

You can use `virtctl vmexport` commands to create, download, or delete a volume exported from a VM, VM snapshot, or persistent volume claim (PVC).

.`virtctl vmexport` commands
[width="100%",cols="1a,2a",options="header"]
|===
|Command |Description
|`virtctl vmexport create <vmexport_name> --vm\|snapshot\|pvc=<object_name>`
|Create a `VirtualMachineExport` custom resource (CR) to export a volume from a VM, VM snapshot, or PVC.

* `--vm`: Exports the PVCs and memory dump of a VM.

> * `--snapshot`: Exports the PVCs contained in a `VirtualMachineSnapshot` CR.

Reviewer 2: memory dump can also be a part of a snapshot so it can also be exported if it was in the snapshot volumes.
Im not sure need to write explicitly here about the memory dump anyways, since a memory dump is contained in a pvc so it should be clear, I think maybe its better to write about it only on the memory dump section

* `--insecure` enables an insecure HTTP connection.

|`virtctl vmexport download <vmexport_name> --<vm\|snapshot\|pvc>=<object_name> --output=<output_file>`
|Create a `VirtualMachineExport` CR and then download the volumes defined in the CR.
|===

[id='vm-memory-dump_{context}']
== VM memory dump

You can use the `virtctl memory-dump` command to output a virtual machine (VM) memory dump on a PVC. You can specify an existing PVC or use the `--create-claim` flag to create a new PVC.

.Prerequisites

* The PVC volume mode must be `FileSystem`.
* The PVC must be large enough to contain the memory dump.
+
The formula for calculating the PVC size is `(VMMemorySize + 100Mi) * FileSystemOverhead`, where `100Mi` is the memory dump overhead.

* You must enable the hot plug feature gate in the `HyperConverged` custom resource by running the following command:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch hco kubevirt-hyperconverged -n openshift-cnv \
  --type json -p '[{"op": "add", "path": "/spec/featureGates", \
  "value": "HotplugVolumes"}]'
----

.Downloading the memory dump

> // Workaround for 4.12

Reviewer 2: I dont think it should state 'workaround' its not a workaround. for 4.13 I added an enhancement of adding a simpler call to the virtcl memory dump download which actually uses the vmexport to download the memory dump. using the vmexport is the basic way of doing it.

Download the memory dump by using the `virtctl vmexport download` command:

[source,terminal]
----
$ virtctl vmexport download <vmexport_name> \

>   --vm=<vm_name> --output=<output_file>

Reviewer 2: Im not sure if this is accurate. Im pretty sure you need the volume name of the memory dump if you use the --vm flag. Also you can do vmexport with --pvc with the memory dump pvc name it might be better here.

Author: The [upstream documentation](http://kubevirt.io/user-guide/operations/export_api/) for `virtctl vmexport download` says that the `--volume` flag is optional. Can you check this?

```
# Downloads a volume from the defined VMExport object.

# The main available flags are:

# --output, mandatory flag to specify the output file.
# --volume, optional flag to specify the name of the downloadable volume.
# --vm|--snapshot|--pvc, if specified, are used to create the VMExport object assuming it doesn't exist. The name of the object to export has to be specified.

$ virtctl vmexport download name [flags]
```

Reviewer 2: Im pretty sure its optional in case there is only 1 volume in the vm. in case of more then 1 then I believe you have to mention the desired volume name. @alromeros can you answer that?

Reviewer 2: quoting this from this doc: "`--volume` specifies the volume to download. This flag is optional if only one volume is available."

Reviewer 3: Yeah, @ShellyKa13 is right about that: `--volume` is only optional if only one volume is available.

----

.`virtctl memory-dump` commands
[width="100%",cols="1a,2a",options="header"]
|===
|Command |Description
|`virtctl memory-dump get <vm_name> --claim-name=<pvc_name>`
|Save the memory dump of a VM on a PVC. The memory dump status is displayed in the `status` section of the `VirtualMachine` resource.

Optional:

* `--create-claim` creates a new PVC with the appropriate size. This flag has the following options:

** `--storage-class=<storage_class>` specifies a storage class.

> ** `--access-mode=<access_mode>` specifies an access mode, for example, `ReadOnlyMany` or `ReadWriteMany`.

Reviewer 2: same here regarding the readonly option

> // * `--output=<output_file>` gets a memory dump and downloads it to a specified output file, for example, `--output=memoryDump.dump.gz`.

Reviewer 2: this flag is relevant only for the memory dump download command that we said is added only in 4.13

Author: That's why I commented it out.

|`virtctl memory-dump get <vm_name>`
|Rerun the `virtctl memory-dump get <vm_name>` command with the same PVC.

This command overwrites the previous memory dump.

> // Did not make it to 4.12. Might make 4.13

Reviewer 2: should you add it to the doc here if its not relevant to 4.12?

Author: These are comments. They are for internal use and do not appear in the final doc.
